GDA Notes2:
Visualization

chart types

Line chart
Track changes over time, shows change

Column chart
Compare two or more values ,track changes, ranking

Heatmap
Use color to compare categories in a data set
Comparison of dimensions/measures.Eg.Shows relationship between data.


Pie chart
Useful to divide the whole segments into parts
Representing proportions.Eg Relativity

Scatter Plot
Shows relationships between different variables.
Eg.correlation,relationship between data.

Distribution
Displays the spread of various outcomes in a dataset.
Helpful in clustering.


Design thinking for data visualization involves five phases:
1. Empathize: Thinking about the emotions and needs of the target audience for the data visualization 
2. Define: Figuring out exactly what your audience needs from the data
3. Ideate: Generating ideas for data visualization
4. Prototype: Putting visualizations together for testing and feedback
5. Test: Showing prototype visualizations to people before stakeholders see them



What is Data Storytelling?

The most effective way to share business information and drive outcomes.

Why is data storytelling the future?
Data storytelling is a methodology for communicating information, tailored to a specific audience, with a compelling narrative. It is the last ten feet of your data analysis and arguably the most important aspect.

Storytelling = visualization + narrative + context

Data storytelling means communicating the meaning of a dataset with visuals and a narrative that are customized for a particular audience

Data visualization is the representation and presentation of data to help with understanding. You can use graphs, charts, word clouds, and other visual depictions to help your audience see and clearly understand your data. 



The narrative you share with your stakeholders needs characters, a setting, a plot, a big reveal, and an "aha moment," just like any other story. 

The characters are the people affected by your story. This could be your stakeholders, customers, clients, and others. When adding information about your characters to your story, you have a great opportunity to include a personal account and bring more human context to the facts that the data has revealed—think about why they care. 

Next up is a setting, which describes what's going on, how often it's happening, what tasks are involved, and other background information about the data project that describes the current situation.

The plot, sometimes called the conflict, is what creates tension in the current situation. This could be a challenge from a competitor, an inefficient process that needs to be fixed, or a new opportunity that the company just can't pass up. This complication of the current situation should reveal the problem your analysis is solving and compel the characters to act. 

The big reveal, or resolution, is how the data has shown that you can solve the problem the characters are facing by becoming more competitive, improving a process, inventing a new system, or whatever the ultimate goal of your data project may be. Finally, your "aha moment" is when you share your recommendations and explain why you think they'll help your company be successful. When I'm working on a presentation, this is where I like to start, too. Using these basic elements to outline your presentation could be a great place to start, and they 

Principles of design of ART
==========================

1. Balance: The design of a data visualization is balanced when the key visual elements, like color and shape, are distributed evenly. This doesn’t mean that you need complete symmetry, but your visualization shouldn’t have one side distracting from the other. If your data visualization is balanced, this could mean that the lines used to create the graphics are similar in length on both sides, or that the space between objects is equal. For example, this column chart (also shown below) is balanced; even though the columns are different heights and the chart isn’t symmetrical, the colors, width, and spacing of the columns keep this data visualization balanced. The colors provide sufficient contrast to each other so that you can pay attention to both the motivation level and the energy level displayed.


2. Emphasis: Your data visualization should have a focal point, so that your audience knows where to concentrate. In other words, your visualizations should emphasize the most important data so that users recognize it first. Using color and value is one effective way to make this happen. By using contrasting colors, you can make certain that graphic elements—and the data shown in those elements—stand out. 
For example, you will notice a heat map data visualization below from The Pudding’s “Where Slang Comes From" article. This heat map uses colors and value intensity to emphasize the states where search interest is highest. You can visually identify the increase in the search over time from low interest to high interest. This way, you are able to quickly grasp the key idea being presented without knowing the specific data values.
￼
3. Movement: Movement can refer to the path the viewer’s eye travels as they look at a data visualization, or literal movement created by animations. Movement in data visualization should mimic the way people usually read. You can use lines and colors to pull the viewer’s attention across the page. 
For example, notice how the average line in this combo chart (also shown below) draws your attention from left to right. Even though this example isn’t moving, it still uses the movement principle to guide viewers’ understanding of the data. 
￼
4. Pattern: You can use similar shapes and colors to create patterns in your data visualization. This can be useful in a lot of different ways. For example, you can use patterns to highlight similarities between different data sets, or break up a pattern with a unique shape, color, or line to create more emphasis.
In the example below, the different colored categories of this stacked column chart (also shown below) are a consistent pattern that makes it easier to compare book sales by genre in each column. Notice in the chart that the Fantasy & Sci Fi category (royal blue) is increasing over time even as the general category (green) is staying about the same. 
￼
5. Repetition: Repeating chart types, shapes, or colors adds to the effectiveness of your visualization. Think about the book sales chart from the previous example: the repetition of the colors helps the audience understand that there are distinct sets of data. You may notice this repetition in all of the examples we have reviewed so far. Take some time to review each of the previous examples and notice the elements that are repeated to create a meaningful visual story.
6. Proportion: Proportion is another way that you can demonstrate the importance of certain data. Using various colors and sizes helps demonstrate that you are calling attention to a specific visual over others. If you make one chart in a dashboard larger than the others, then you are calling attention to it. It is important to make sure that each chart accurately reflects and visualizes the relationship among the values in it. In this dashboard (also shown below), the slice sizes and colors of the pie chart compared to the data in the table help make the number of donuts eaten by each person the focal point. 
￼

These first six principles of design are key considerations that you can make while you are creating your data visualization. These next three principles are useful checks once your data visualization is finished. If you have applied the initial six principles thoughtfully, then you will probably recognize these next three principles within your visualizations already. 
7. Rhythm: This refers to creating a sense of movement or flow in your visualization. Rhythm is closely tied to the movement principle. If your finished design doesn’t successfully create a flow, you might want to rearrange some of the elements to improve the rhythm.
8. Variety: Your visualizations should have some variety in the chart types, lines, shapes, colors, and values you use. Variety keeps the audience engaged. But it is good to find balance since too much variety can confuse people. The variety you include should make your dashboards and other visualizations feel interesting and unified.
9. Unity: The last principle is unity. This means that your final data visualization should be cohesive. If the visual is disjointed or not well organized, it will be confusing and overwhelming. 
Being a data analyst means learning to think in a lot of different ways. These nine principles of design can help guide you as you create effective and interesting visualizations. 


The following are visualizations that are more specialized in Tableau with links to examples or the steps to create them:
* Highlight tables appear like tables with conditional formatting. Review the steps to build a highlight table. 
* Heat maps show intensity or concentrations in the data. Review the steps to build a heat map.
* Density maps show concentrations (like a population density map). Refer to instructions to create a heat map for density.  
* Gantt charts show the duration of events or activities on a timeline. Review the steps to build a Gantt chart.
* Symbol maps display a mark over a given longitude and latitude. Learn more from this example of a symbol map.
* Filled maps are maps with areas colored based on a measurement or dimension. Explore an example of a filled map.
* Circle views show comparative strength in data. Learn more from this example of a circle view.
* Box plots also known as box-and whiskers charts show the distribution of values along a chart axis. Refer to the steps to build a box plot.
* Bullet graphs compare a primary measure with another and can be used instead of dial gauge charts. Review the steps to build a bullet graph.
* Packed bubble charts display data in clustered circles. Review the steps to build a packed bubble chart.

